---
layout: post
title:  "Ultrasound Robot for Cardiac Toxicity Detection"

date:   2019-05-10 14:46:01 -0600
---

The goal of this project was to develop a semi-autonomous robotic ultrasound system that can hold an ultrasound
probe and position it correctly to take an ultrasound image of a patient's heart that can be used to monitor for cardiac toxicity. The robotic ultrasound system consisted of a Kinova JACO2 robot arm, VSCAN ultrasound probe, SynTouch BioTac sensor, a custom graphical user interface, and a CNN image classifier.

## The Problem

Cardiac toxicity can be an unfortunate side affect of chemotherapy treatment, but is detectable using ultrasound images of the heart. Having early warning to the onset of cardiac toxicity can save a patient's life, but due to the time and labor needed to perform the ultrasounds, monitoring all patients is difficult. Another issue is the variability in the positioning of the probe between technicians, which can affect consistent identification of cardiac toxicity over long periods of time.  

## Our Solution

To try and address some of these problems, the solution we proposed was a robotic ultrasound system that uses computer vision to make adjustments to saved position data to consistently and accurately take ultrasound images over many sessions with minimal technician interaction.

Our robotic ultrasound system uses the JACO2 6 degrees of freedom (DOF) robotic arm to hold the ultrasound probe, with a BioTac force sensor replacing the tip of one of the arm's fingers. The arm can be manually controlled in two ways using our custom graphical user interface (GUI). First, the user can use a series of buttons, the virtual joystick, to move the arm in all 6 DOF. Additionally, if the correct positional information is already known for the patient, i.e the position to get a good image of the heart, it can be entered in the GUI to command the arm to move to the correct position. Along with the manual control, the GUI can be used to set a position that the robot will automatically return to periodically over the course of the chemotherapy session.

The BioTac force sensor is used to detect the shear force on the finger tip to detect the amount of pressure on the patient that is being applied with the ultrasound probe. In order to get good ultrasound images, a certain amount of pressure is needed, but we also need our system to be safe for the patients. A maximum pressure threshold was implemented, and was set so that the robot arm would go straight away from the patient and back to a home position if the force ever reached an uncomfortable amount of pressure. Since the patient is likely to move a little and may take deep breaths when the ultrasound is in position, we implemented a PID controller to maintain sufficient pressure for a good ultrasound image.
